Testing on Friday, testing on Friday, 1, 2, 3.
Testing 2, 3, 4 on Friday, 2, 3, 4. Testing this,
this is Monday the 28th. Testing,
testing, testing, testing, testing.
This is Monday, June 28th. What's
the name of this building? We were in the Central
Square building. Central Square building on
North Central Expressway in Dallas, and I have the
honor and pleasure of chatting with John
Creighton. That's C-R-I-C-H-T-O-N.
And known to my friends as Jack. As Jack, but
pronounced Creighton. Right. To introduce
yourself, sir, to anyone who might hear this tape
or read the transcription, give us a brief
biographical summary of your experience in life
from growing up, mom and dad, before you got to A&M.
I was born in a little town in Louisiana named after
my grandfather of Creighton, Louisiana. My
grandfather owned a cotton plantation and a
steamboat landing. And in 1916,
he sold this plantation to the Palmer Brothers in
Chicago, who owned the Palmer House, among other
things. And after he sold this plantation, they
struck oil on it. And over a number of years, I took
out several million barrels of oil. And I've been
trying to get even with the oil business ever since
then, because my grandfather didn't retain any
interest in this. My father was a graduate of LSU.
My mother was a schoolteacher that went to
Louisiana Normal in Natchitoches, Louisiana.
And my father ran the plantation for the Palmer
brothers for a number of years. And then he and an
associate bought out the Palmer brothers'
interest, and he continued to run the plantation.
raising cotton and cattle, mostly. And my father
died when I was 12 years old. I attended
grade school in a... Creighton did not have school
facilities when I grew up, and I attended a school
in East Point, Louisiana, three miles away. And it
was a very good academic school. Also, I played on
the basketball team at East Point. And then my
senior year, I stayed with my aunt in Shreveport,
Louisiana, and went to school at Byrd High School.
where I played basketball on the Byrd High team and
was the leading scorer at Byrd and held a school
scoring record for several years.
Then I decided I wanted to take petroleum
engineering as a means of getting even with the oil
business because my grandfather sold out without
retaining any of it. And I went to see Mr. McGowan,
who was the president of the United Gas Company.
Mr. McGowan had been the auditor, had been the
accountant for the Palmer Brothers. He and my
father had gotten to be very good friends. So as I
say, my father died when I was 12. And so I went up to
see Mr. McGowan. I said, I want to take petroleum
engineering. Where should I go to school? He said,
well, our experience has been that graduates of
University of Oklahoma and Texas A&M have been the
best that we've hired. And he said, if you're
interested in the military, Texas A&M is the place
to go. He said, we have a plane. And mind you, this is
1933. He said, we have a plane going down to Houston
taking Mr. Hargrove, the vice president, for a
meeting. And en route to Houston, we'll drop you
off at College Station. And of course, there was no
airfield at College Station at that time. So sure
enough, we took off. It was a twin-engine beach. I
remember the pilot's name was Eddie Heffley. And
when we got over College Station, we circled
around and Eddie looked for a place to land and
finally found an alfalfa field that looked
suitable. So we landed in this alfalfa field.
Farmers came from everywhere to see this plain
land. And so I got off the plane and looked like I was
received as somebody who just got down from Mars.
And I caught a ride. hitchhiked into town, into
College Station, and the petroleum engineering
building had just been built. I talked to some
people there. I went around the campus, talked to
various people, and liked the military, and the
people were so friendly. and everybody howdy and
answered any question I wanted to ask. So I
highwayed back to the alfalfa field. And sure
enough, at 3.30, the plane returned from Houston,
circled around again. Farmers came from miles to
see the plane land, and landed, picked me up, went
back to Shreveport, and I reported back to Mr.
McGowan that I decided to go to A&M. That was how I
first got interested in A&M, and that's how I ended
up at A&M. And that visit was about what time of the
year? That visit must have been in around May or
June of that year. Then your goal was to be a
petroleum engineer, and what did you think you
were going to do with that degree? Well, what I
thought I was going to do was make some money out of
it. So anyway, I entered Texas A&M not knowing the
traditions they had there, only that I had also
checked with other people and found out A&M had a
very good academic reputation. and also that it
was affordable as to the amount of money you had to
spend, and also like the military. So I had an uncle
who was a captain in the Field Artillery, regular
Army. I visited him several times up at Fort
Robinson, Nebraska. And so that was the
horse-drawn field artillery, and I liked to ride.
And so he taught me English-style riding,
although I had known how to ride growing up on the
plantation. And so I joined the field artillery, E
Battery Field Artillery. And anyway,
like I say, I was not acquainted with the
traditions. And I remember that first, about the
first three nights we were there, they had a
meeting of all the freshmen on the YMCA steps. And
they had greeted us, somebody greeted us and
welcomed us to the college. And all at once
somebody whipped out a Sam Brown belt and said, air
out, Fish. I didn't know what was happening. until
I got hit on the leg several times and I decided that
running was the only thing to do, which I did with
the rest of the fish. And I think I spent the night
out in the woods there and came back the next day.
And that was my introduction to the traditions at
A&M. When you came to enroll in September, how did
you get from Northwest Louisiana at the College
Station. Interesting. I came by train and left
from Shreveport. I forget it was quite a long train
trip and at Hearn you had to change trains there.
Hearn was quite a railroad center at that time and
so had about a two or three hour layover in Hearn
until we got on the train going to College Station.
And I had a, I think I had a steamer truck, which I had
a heck of a time getting from the station to the,
from the station to College Station. to the room
I'd been assigned to. What did you bring with you as
a freshman? What was in that truck? I knew you had
military uniforms, but I had athletic equipment.
and, of course, some business-type clothes and
some social-type clothes, a lot of shoes, and I was
pretty well outfitted. And then, of course, I got
the uniforms when I got to College Station. And I
remember we were assigned to Hart Hall. It was a new
building at that time. And I roomed with a fellow
named Phelps Lommadew, who was from Port Arthur.
And he, his
last name translated, I think, is Man of God.
L-A-M-B-A-R. Phelps was his first name.
L-Lamadu. H-O-M-M-E-D-I-E-U. Oh. Phelps
Lamadu. And he had been a star quarterback on the
Fort Arthur football team. And there was a great
rivalry between Port Arthur and Beaumont at that
time. I guess there always has been. And we had two
guys from, played on the football team at
Beaumont, two in Port Arthur, and they had a great
rivalry. Describe your freshman room. What did
you and Phelps have in that room? In that room, we
had two desks. I had a radio and a double bunk bed,
and you flipped to see who had the top bunk and who
had the bottom bunk. And it was a nice room, and I
forget whether we had a washbowl in it. I'm sure the
John was a community John. And what we roomed,
oddly enough, we roomed between two seniors'
rooms, and this was on the second floor, and the
It wasn't too long before we found out what we were
supposed to do. The sophomores called a meeting
and told us what we were required to do, and I was
assigned to be the room orderly for one of the
seniors next door. I happened to be the captain of
the battery. Captain, his name was Charlie
Swanson. I remember he roomed with a guy named Yuki
Porter, and the,
but the sophomores told us our duties and so forth,
and then introduced us to the, to hazing, and At
that time, I remember about 18 sophomores. The
reason I remember the exact number is that each one
of them got three licks at you, which adds up to 54.
So I can divide that by three and get the number 18
rather readily. What did they use for paddles? The
paddles were sawed off and shaved off baseball
bats for the most part. But they were thin. They
were sawed off quite a bit. It was not like a whole
baseball bat. It stung pretty good, but you soon
learned that after the first several licks, why,
your buttocks got sort of numb, and it
didn't hurt too much. And anyway, if a sophomore
hits you low, why, you had licks on him. So they were
pretty accurate on where they hit you because if
they hit you lower, you could say, okay, it's my
turn, you know. Your outfit, what was it? E Battery
Field Artillery. Did it have a nickname? No, I
don't recall, but that battery was noted for
winning intramurals. We were intramural
champions, which was a big deal in the A&M at that
time. And that tradition continued. As a matter of
fact, when When I became captain of the battery in
my senior year, when the freshmen checked in, we
went down to the registration line and we
recruited guys by sports. So that we ended up with
some guys who weren't quite good enough, let's
say, to make the football team or the basketball
team, but were pretty good athletes. And we
continued to win the intramural. How did the
outfit introduce you and your fish buddies to A&M
traditions? How did they explain things and tell
you what you were to do and not to do? The sophomores
took care of that. The sophomores
called you together on that. And you had mentioned
Colonel Anderson, who was a great guy. I ran
cross-country under Colonel Anderson because he
was the track coach, and then he became
commandant. And Colonel Anderson was a man who
instilled character in the guys who ran for him.
And as later I recall, there was one incident where
a guy crawled across the finish line and actually
won the meet for him. But Colonel Anderson, I
remember him for another reason. When I was
captain of the battery, there was some hazing
going on in my battery. And so he called me over and
he said, Jack, I want you to get the names of those
sophomores that did this hazing, understand
there's been some hazing. He said, I want to
inspect them. And I said, fine, come over and
inspect them, Colonel. So lined up all the fish,
and they dropped their trousers. And the man,
their buttocks were just blue as a grape. And he
said, Jack, I want you to get the names of those
sophomores that did this. And I said, what are you
going to do with them, Colonel? He said, I'm going
to kick them out. And I said, well, in that case,
Colonel, I'm sorry, I just can't do that. And he
said, you're busted. Hand me over your buttons. So
I peeled off my buttons and gave them to him. He
said, you have to march in ranks. So this I did for
the next week. And at the end of the week, Colonel
Anderson called me over and he said, Jack, I've
decided not to kick these guys out of school. I'm
going to put them on the bull ring for the rest of the
year. And I said, in that case, Colonel, I'll get
you their names. So I went back to the fish and I
said, give me the names of the sophomores that did
this. and I said the colonel gives me his word he's
not going to kick these guys out of school so anyway
they turned in a list of the people and it turned out
that these fish had turned in the names of just the
sophomores they didn't like and two or three of
them had been in Houston when this happened and so I
turned the names into the colonel and he put all
these guys on the bull ring including these guys
who were innocent from Houston. But anyway, I
think that was one of the best experiences of my
being at A&M actually was the, was being, you went
from a fish to a corporal, then a sergeant, then to
an officer. And I was first sergeant in my outfit,
and then I got to be captain. and a captain of an
outfit had a lot of responsibilities and has to
make a lot of decisions. And this was wonderful
training that I wouldn't take anything for. In
those first, how did you register for your
academics that first semester? Do you remember
how? Yeah, we went to the, I'm not exactly sure, but
you had certain requirements according to what
you had signed up for. Like I've taken petroleum
engineering, and you had to take some basic
courses, English and so forth.
As a freshman year, you didn't have too many
options, but as time went on, sophomores and
juniors and seniors, you did have options.
Describe as much as you can recall that first
semester academically. What were those classes
like for a boy from Louisiana? Well, the classes in
the first year, I remember Tom Harrington taught
chemistry. Oh, describe him as a teacher. He was a
wonderful guy. But he taught chemistry, and he
also took people on tours to Europe every year. And
he was a very broad-gauge teacher. guy and was very
stimulating to the students, I'd say. But he had
large classes,
but I later got to know Tom quite well. Did he have a
nickname? Did the students give him a nickname? I
don't remember. So many of them did have, but I
don't remember Tom having any nickname. He was
from up here at McKinney originally. Plano.
Plano, right. Plano and McKinney, I knew that. But
then the other classes... Well, not English. Do
you remember a special? Oh, yes, I do know English.
John Paul Abbott was the I remember really
stimulated me as far as English was concerned. And
he also was the tennis coach. And I played tennis. I
was on the varsity in tennis and played several
years. Describe him as a teacher. As a teacher, he
was stimulating. And as a matter of fact, when I was
a sophomore, They had the William Morris
Sophomore Writing Contest. And the prize was $25,
which was a lot of money at that time. And I won the
thing. I won the William Morris, but John Paul
Abbott was helpful in my, because I went to him from
time to time and got his advice on things. And I
wrote a, my paper was on Huey P. Long. which was sort
of an interesting character that I knew a lot about
from Louisiana. I knew a lot of the things that
actually
newspapers didn't, and I think that was one of the
reasons I won it, because it was sort of a yellow
journalism.
But in my early days at A&M, I went out for fish
basketball, and I made the team, and I later played
varsity at A&M. Describe going out for the fish.
What was freshman basketball like then? A whole
bunch of people. A lot of people who, and the coach
had to cut pretty good to weed the people out. Who
was the coach? At that time, I think the freshman
coach was Higginbottom, but the varsity coach was
John Reed, and who is, if you have talked to anybody
about John Reed, he's a a classic among basketball
coaches. I remember he, at one time, we couldn't
hit, people for some reason weren't hitting the
basket. And so at the halftime, he brought a step
ladder out and had everybody climb up the step
ladder and dunk the ball in to show that it really
would go through. And then another time, we had a
guy on the team who was sort of a, he wasn't passing
the ball to other guys. So at the half, Coach Reed
said, He said, you know, I thought everybody knew
everybody here. He said, Mr. Carmichael, I want
you to meet Mr. Hutto. Mr. Hutto, I want you to meet
so-and-so. And he introduced everybody. But that
was his style. Describe the basketball arena
then. Well, the basketball arena then, it would
seat about 3,500 people, I guess. It's now torn
down where it was.
Everybody went to the games. I mean, it wasn't like
now where you got this beautiful arena and only
about a third of it was filled up, but everybody
went to the games. For freshmen, who did y'all
play? Well, we played We played high school teams
and
mostly high school teams. I can't remember us
playing any college teams. Most parts of freshmen
just played high school teams. And didn't go on the
road much? No, not on the road. In the varsity, of
course you did, but the freshmen you didn't play.
Did you get any benefit? You didn't get a
basketball scholarship or anything that fresh in
here? No, no. I sort of got this for you that you
might be interested in. Let's see if I can find it.
Let's see here.
About how many were on that freshman team? On the
freshman team, we had been about 12 or 15,
something like that. And how tall were the tall
boys? The tall boys were probably six feet at that
time. Here's something I'd cut out. Fish cages
defeat thrall-high tigers. And it says,
Creighton midget forward from Louisiana started
the game off with a bang by scoring the first goal on
a perfectly executed tip-off signal. And then
later on, in
my junior year, Of course, I cut this out. It said,
the A&M basketball team always turned out to be the
dark horse of the season. After dropping seven of
the first eight games, the Aggie quartet beat the
TCU Frogs in a thrilling game, upset the dope when
they easily outclassed SMU by a large scoring
margin, and then they almost took the Texas U
Longhorns in one of the most thrilling finishes of
the season. Few will deny a minute more would have
seen the Aggies take the lead. Jack Creighton's
last two shots of the game stand out as one of the
highlights of the season. And you had asked me how
that happened. I later on played with an Army team,
and we played an exhibition game against the world
champion Celtics, and I was the high point man of
the team. My goodness. Thank you, thank you. Oh,
that's splendid. For you as a freshman, About when
did basketball workouts start and during the
season? They started early. The basketball
season started, I'd say, in September and went
through December, I'd say. For you, in your
outfit, did being on the basketball team get you
any advantages? Oh yeah, it sure did. And then
varsity, you ate at the training table during the
season, and you got steaks and so forth. You didn't
as a fish. As a fish, you had no special privileges,
but you had a training table at Sabisa Hall where
you got special food, steak from now on in, you
know. Let's go back to your fish year. Describe...
Describe a typical day that first semester, a
class day. What time did you get up? What did you do
when? Take me through a whole day of a typical fish
day in the fall of 1930. What would this be, 33? 33,
33. Reveille,
I think Reveille was at 6 o'clock, and a bugle of
blue Reveille. You farmed outside, marched to the
mess hall, and had breakfast, marched back. You
cleaned up the room
orderly floor. I was the room orderly floor. for
Charlie Swanson, and I cleaned up his room, made
his bed, and
washed the mirror, and scrubbed out the toilet,
and saw that his room could pass inspection if it
needed to, and then had to do the same thing for my
own room. After that, while you went to class, I
think class was, I don't know exactly what time
classes started, but at 8.30 and 9 o'clock, and you
usually had three classes in the morning. Then you
broke for lunch, and you came back and you marched
to the mess hall again. Came back to your outfit,
marched to the mess hall. And then after lunch,
while you had usually lunch, labs. Classes are
labs, but labs were all in the afternoon. And the
usually labs were two or three hours. And then
after labs, or after the afternoon session why you
had some some free time and then you again marched
to the mess hall for supper and then fish had to be in
the hold at 7 30. I remember that so they I forget
what the bugle call was, but they sounded the bugle
call at 730. You had to be in your hole, and actually
inspections were made by the senior officers to be
sure you were in your hole. And then I think TAPS was
at 11 o'clock, I think. But it lights out then. It
taps. And it was a full day. And you also had
physical education as one of your obligations.
And if you were on a